businesses and households, and that is what we expect in the near
future. So thank you, and we look forward to taking your
questions.
Thank you, Governor. We'll kick off with Barbara
Edmonds.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you, Governor, for your opening comments.
Just wanting to have a look at three different lines of
questioning, but I can ask the other two, Mr.
Chair, a little bit later just to allow time.
Sure.
My first line of questioning is around, obviously last year's Financial
Stability Report in November, we were looking at
impacts around what tariffs were doing on our domestic market,
the adjustment by our firms in response to that.
This year, obviously,
recovering from a very low
standard and some recovery there, and now we have the Iran
conflict.
More domestically,
what is it that we can do in New Zealand given that I'm
noticing much more commentary now around the potential for
stagflation, so low growth, high
inflation. We also have unemployment numbers that
came out yesterday,
not exactly exciting. Yesterday may have dropped by 0.1%, but
when you dig into the statistics, higher unemployment in
Auckland and Wellington, our urban centers, as well as for
our non-employment education and training, so our young people.
What would be if we move into, say for example, a stagflation
setting, and I'm not saying we are in one now, but I'm hearing a lot of
commentary about it.
Without looking towards say a Volcker shock, which what happened in the
US, what are some of the solutions that, for
example, the Financial Policy Committee would be suggesting to
ministers around how to... We want to ensure that
we don't have higher unemployment because it's already high enough.
We've got a lot child poverty as well.
Those standards
have also increased. How do we actually deal with this?
Because the diversity of our economy is, and low productivity has been an
issue for a number of decades. What would be your solution or what would
the Finance Policy Committee, what are the sort of solutions
they'd be looking to advise ministers on?
Well, thank you for that question.
So the first thing is that we did see
before the conflict in the Middle East that the New Zealand economy was
recovering, and we do expect now to see somewhat weaker
growth.
But we will comment more on the growth outlook and inflation when we
come to the Monetary Policy Report later in May.
I think from a financial policy perspective, what we're highlighting in the
report is that the data that we have in terms
of
firms being listed as high
risk from the bank perspective and risk of default, that had come down
significantly across many different sectors of the economy.
So I think the key thing right now is that the banks have the
ability to keep on supporting both firms and
households with their lending and be flexible in how they support the
households. And what we see in the data on the banks'
position is that they are in a good position to do this.
They do have both the liquidity and the capital buffers.
So from a financial
stability perspective, we actually do have some strength in New Zealand
right now in the sense that we have ability to keep on
supporting firms and households.
And importantly, some of the things that we mention in the report
is on the margins and the importance of
keep on looking at different ways of ensuring that
competition is strong enough so that the margins that we see...
We have a special topic on small businesses and medium-sized businesses,
and there we see that the
lending margins are higher than they are, for example, in
Australia. So I think continue working
with what we have done in the past few years with competition
to reduce those margins and make sure that households and
firms get access to capital will be very important in this environment.
I don't know if my colleagues would like to add.
Governor, I might just add,
it does highlight, as the Governor alluded to, the importance of the work
that we do, thinking about our financial stability mandate and our prudential
regulation responsibilities, the work that we do
through the whole cycle to ensure that we're calibrating our settings
in the most appropriate way to support resilience,
such that when crises like these occur,
the system is as well-placed as it possibly can be to
weather these shocks
through the cycle. So, the most important thing we can do is really
staying laser-focused on our financial stability mandate and making sure that we
have those right settings in place.
And sorry, if I can ask a supplementary, Mr. Chair, if that's okay.
Sure.
Because you mentioned the small business and obviously that the
banks, they're still
comfortable with it, but obviously their risk weighting will be different for
say
borrowing for residential property.
So I meet a number of small businesses, and particularly at a business
breakfast I had last week with a number of advisors who advise
small businesses, it seems to be that there's been no
shift for small businesses in accessing capital.
They still say, "We still have to go to the bank, but it's still only easier
to go to the bank to access capital if we have a house that can be secured against
it." What are the types of competition policy which should
we be looking at as legislators
to help support small business accessing capital?
Yeah. So I think one of the things that happened in the capital review that was
decided on in December is that we will have more granular risk
weightsAnd that will make it actually easier to have the
appropriate risk weights, and that will help lending
for different types of businesses.
And the other thing is what we do
stress in the report is transparency, because for
mortgages, there is a lot of transparency, and households can compare across
different banks, but that is more difficult for small and
medium sized firm to get the same transparency.
So if we can get more transparency, it would be easier for
SMEs to really get the opportunity to compare,
and that will increase competition across the banks.
So that's what we're advocating in this report for that
reason.
And
what's the response been from the banks, for example?
Are they
open to working with you? When do you see the sort of transparency
starting to kind of be more public so that the potential
borrower can actually start to compare the different
products between the banks? Because this has been an issue for small
businesses for a while. So trying to see some sort of movement
in it is something that I know that they're calling for quite strongly.
Yeah. No, so we haven't seen the response yet from the
FSRS of yesterday.
But I don't know if you would like to address-
Chris, why don't you...
So the thing that comes to mind for me is just the project that we've been working
on around the loan level data, and so we're collecting that from banks, and that
will come available from around October later this year.
And so that really creates some opportunities for us to be able to dig much more
deeply into the data, more granular, and improve our reporting.
So helping to add to that transparency that we've been talking about.
And in that project, I think the banks have been working with us really well.
So,
yeah, there's good opportunities to come with some of those things that are already
in train.
Yeah, I'd echo that. Very good collaboration with the banks in relation to that
loan level data initiative.
Thank you. I'll come back later, Ryan, just allow for one other-
Yeah. Thanks.
Barb, I'd actually just like to ask a sup on this, and if anyone else has got a sup
specific around small business, I'm happy to just jump.
Otherwise, I'll go back to Chloe. But just on that
transparency, do you have any recommendations around
approaches like standardized disclosure, benchmarking, portability,
and has any of the open banking shift started to flow through into
that space? Just be interested in your view on that.
And also, is it within your remit or also
Comcom,
or other entities to help sort of solicit that?
The open banking is advancing, is the information that we're getting,
but I'm going to ask my colleagues to comment a bit more on the
transparency with the loan level data that we'll have.
We can clearly contribute
to that with the way that we report and
send out the information. But on the open banking, Angus or
Chris, would you like to comment more exactly on the status?
Because I know it's advancing.
Yeah.
Jess might want to jump in here as well.
As you know, Chair, the open banking is very much being led by
MB.
We've been involved
in a supporting role in that context.
We're very supportive of the work that's going on there.
It's really important and good to see banks getting on
board with that. But again, the transparency
point is the focus we've had is very much in relation to this loan level data
exercise and really digging into the analysis that
we've identified in the report this time, and we look
forward to shining a light on that more over
the coming months and years as we really improve our
access to data.
Thank you. Chloe Swarbrick's got a supplementary on this.
Yeah, just really wanted to dig into that point around SME borrowing, and
particularly, I believe it's on page 20 of your report, you're speaking to how
housing market dynamics can influence SME lending because so many SME
owners are often borrowing against their house, which is obviously a common
product-
Yes
... that's provided by many banks.
Governor, I'm sure you've heard the
caricature of our economy as a housing market with bits tacked on
the side. This is a challenge that we've faced for a really long time.
However, your analysis kind of lends itself to the fact that what
we're looking at here is not only real problems with the housing
market and how much capital is flowing into that, but also the flow on effects with
regard to SME lending and therefore our productive economy as well.
I was wondering if you could just unpack for us, I guess, some of the challenges
that you potentially foresee if house prices are to further
decrease. Will that then mean that there is a risk that banks' ability to
lend to productive small businesses also further reduces?
And how do we deal with that, if so?
Yeah.
I'm very aware of the fact that many SMEs do use
their home as collateral in terms of loans
that is then used for small businesses.
What we've seen now is that house prices have been flat overall
for a number of years, and then there's quite some regional differences
where parts of Southern Island, parts of the rural economy
has been performing better. We've seen house prices going up, and it's been
weaker around Auckland and Wellington in particular.
What we do highlight is that
if we saw a worse outcome
than we expect now,
because now we still expect prices to remain about
flat or actually start increase a little bit over
time, then I don't think that we'll see a large impact as long as
there's collateral in the house. But if we see a much worse outcome, that would
again hit this. The other thing that is good, though, is that the
more granular risk weights-Will actually help
because it will get better data in terms of an ability to lend
to households as well.
The other thing is that we did change it to the macro-prudential
framework last year. So we changed the
LTV, the loan to value ratio, and eased that
somewhat, and that means that banks can actually increase their
lending as compared to loan to value ratio.
They can make an exception for a larger share than they had before.
So that's one of the things that we've done recently to make it easier for
banks to lend to households.
But I guess if I can just
final sup on this, Mr. Chair, if I may?
Yep.
Yeah.
So I guess just to put that as simply as possible to the, I don't know, seven-odd
people who may potentially be tuned in,
I guess, is there a risk that if house prices continue to
flatline or to drop, that that has a negative impact
on productivity in this country?
I think making a direct
line from a part of the economy where
house prices might not perform as well to overall
productivity, it's many steps in there.
So as an economist, I would be cautious, because I think there are many
other things that could be on the upside in term of productivity and just in terms
of investment in
more digital services and a lot of other-
Renewable energy
... infrastructure that are coming in.
So I would be a little bit cautious to say that, but I
do think that overall the housing market is
important for SMEs. What we
have done is made it easier, both through the risk weights and
through the loan to value ratio, to increase lending.
And I think going forward, the main scenario is still that we'll see
prices moving sideways or somewhat
higher.
And if we do have time, we may get to the structural reforms that were alluded to
by Paul Conway in a recent speech. But if I may, to my primary now, Mr.
Chair.
No, we've got-- Yeah, I'll go to Deputy Governor Grosser for a sup.
I just want to go to a sup on the SMEs as well, and it's to do with
the ANZ card spending data that came out yesterday or the
day before, and there was
an alarmist headline that said card spending fell off a cliff, and
spending was going backwards in apparel, interestingly in
groceries, and in a variety of areas, but people were spending more on fuel.
So that's unsurprising. It just
started to ring alarm bells for me with respect to our
SMEs,
to the extent to which they are going to be challenged by this fall in
spending,
and the extent to which banks will be in a position to hopefully
support them through it. So I wonder if you have any comments around that
whole scenario.
Yeah. So again, I'm trying to keep to the financial
stability perspective and not move too much towards the next monetary
policy meeting. But it's true that with higher fuel
prices, now in the near term, we do expect that to carve out
some other spending, and that's also what you see in that card
transaction data that we see, and that is often small businesses
being affected, retailers,
restaurants, hotels, hospitality, et cetera.
I'm sorry.
So I think that what we do see and what we do lift in this report
is that
what we've seen just before, up until the data we have, which includes March,
there was much fewer small firms
or medium-sized firms or businesses overall that
were considered high risk by the banks.
So we're going into this with a period where
the situation for banks in terms of the risks of
defaults and people not being able to pay
their loans were actually declining.
So we are in a position where the banks, both in terms of having had a
few years now where the defaults were declining
and they also have very strong liquidity and capital buffer.
So it means that the banks do have the ability right now to
support the small businesses and medium-sized business
throughout the coming few months that are likely to be the
toughest, until we hopefully see things starting to recover
again. So the banks are really in a strong position to support
SMEs right now.
Thank you.
And if I could just add to that.
Yes, please.
One of the points we make in the report, and this is very much echoed by the
banks themselves, is that where businesses or households
are finding that they're stretched, that if there are risks in
relation to concerns about repayment and debt,
to engage with your bank
early, swiftly, constructively.
The banks are very much on message on that point as well.
So I think that's a really important message to get out.
Thank you. We'll go to a new primary now from Chloe Swarbrick.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Now, I appreciate that this, of course, is not the monetary
policy statement, but of course, there is a synthesis between that and what we
are discussing today.
Just on the point that you made in introductory remarks around constantly just
assessing the international arena and context and constantly
calibrating settings, just wanted to get your take on something
from the Australia Institute. So you'll be aware that two or three days ago now,
the Reserve Bank of Australia made the decision to increase the
interest rate rise. And I just want to read from the Australia Institute
who said, "Higher interest rates will do nothing to open the Strait of Hormuz.
Higher interest rates cannot change the world price of oil and bring down fuel
prices. All this does is heap more pain on already stretched
households." Is that analysis that the Reserve Bank here agrees with?
So I really will not comment on monetary policy today,
because the focus is on the financial stability report.
What we've said so far in our last statement is that we do
expect somewhat higher near-term inflation.
Medium-term inflation that's our job to ensure that
it becomes low and stable again. And on
growth, we also expect somewhat weaker growth, but we
still expect growth this year. That's important.
And we are looking at a number
of factors to see if the near-term higher
inflation becomes embedded in the economy.
And whether or not we do that, we will comment at our next meeting in
May.
Okay. So hearing you'd prefer not to talk about those things, perhaps then this
is the open door to talk more about those structural reforms that I alluded to,
which obviously Paul Conway addressed in a speech last month, I
believe. On page eight, I believe, of your report, you say
that the fossil fuel crisis, and our exposure to the fossil
fuel crisis, which obviously Fitch has also highlighted as our substantial
dependence on energy imports may result in weaker economic growth
and tightening conditions. Can you just elaborate
on what those structural reforms are that are being highlighted by
RBNZ as an opportunity for fiscal policy or for
government to potentially deal with here, noting, of course, you don't want to talk
about monetary policy and the limitations or efficacy thereof today?
Yeah. So I don't have Paul's
speech ahead of me, but I do think that
one thing that we as economists often stress is that if we
get structural reforms that increase productivity, that will increase
growth, and it also tends to be good for
inflation over the medium term in terms of higher productivity
means that you don't need to increase the prices as much because you're more
productive, so you can get both higher wages without getting
higher inflation. And then in terms of actual
structural reforms, I think it would be more appropriate for Paul to
answer to his speech right now.
Thank you. Okay, we're going to go to Dan Bidois.
Hey. Thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you, Governor, and to your team for a
comprehensive
stability report and media online live
stream yesterday. I thought that went really well.
Hey, I just want to test the resilience that you're
referring to a lot in the report, in particular the
stress test scenarios that the bank is modeling.
I'm just wondering, I guess first question off the bat is what
scenarios have you modeled, in particular in relation to the
conflict in the Middle East, how severe those scenarios
are modeled,
and what the likely impact
of those scenarios will be on the stability of the
banking system in terms of
capital
markets,
and the ability of banks to continue to
lend?
Yeah. Well, thank you. So there are a number of things here I
can comment on. So the first thing is that we did a stress
test related to geopolitical uncertainty
last year, and that included
assuming that unemployment increased to 10.5%,
GDP falling by 6.5,
and house prices falling 35%. So it was a
rather extreme scenario, and we don't expect that at all in the current
situation. That's important to say.
What we did in this report is that we updated that scenario
with our new capital settings that we introduced
in December last year, and they're being phased in gradually
now. And what we show in the report is
that with the new capital settings, with the same assumptions on
unemployment growth and house price fall, the banks
still
have capital which is above the minimum
level. So even in that extreme scenario, they do have the
ability to keep on supporting the economy and keep on
lending, but they will eat into some of the buffers, but they're still above the
minimum buffers. The other thing that we're doing is that this year we
will also update this scenario,
including in a few features that are more directly linked to the current
scenario. So I'll hand over to Angus to comment on that.
Yeah. So-
Thank you
... the previous
stress test was very much around geopolitical instability and
trade challenges. The one that we're doing this year does, as the
governor says, bring in more of the
circumstances that we're dealing with at the moment in terms of, for example,
a materially higher oil price than the one that we're seeing at the
moment. Importantly, that stress test is one that we're going to be
doing with our counterparts in Australia, the Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority. We think that's a really helpful exercise,
particularly noting that 85% of our
banking sector is Australian-owned.
So doing this in conjunction with Australia and thinking about the impact
on the New Zealand subsidiaries and the Australian group and
parent, and where the
linkages might be between those, we think will be very
useful and very informative. So that's
about to be rolled out in terms of that stress testing.
We'll be reporting on that later in the year, and we're very happy to discuss it
further with the committee in due course.
Thank you. Can I just clarify and confirm that, okay, so current stress
testing of the banking system hasn't modeled
for a higher level of oil
price?What level of oil price have you modeled for at the
moment in current stress test?
The current... Yeah, do you have the exact number, Angus
or Chris?
There wasn't-
I don't think
... there wasn't an explicit assumption-
That's all right
... on oil prices in last year's one, so
when we put out the scenario for this year's stress test, the one we're working
with the counterparts in Australia, that's about a month's time,
and that'll include a bit more detail around exactly the assumption used there.
So it'll be a higher oil price, but it'll also be a sustained higher oil price.
So you'll see, I guess, the difference between the
two scenarios really highlight what the role of some of those pressures from
high oil prices will be.
But I would just make the point that the stress test we did last year was
enormously helpful in informing our understanding
of the current crisis because it was very much focused on
geopolitical instability. And as the governor
referred to, with really quite extreme impacts on
GDP, unemployment, house prices, that really
do help inform our understanding of how our
banking system would cope with prolonged or
challenging geopolitical instability of the type we're seeing now, albeit with
slightly different
inputs.
Okay, thank you for that. The second question I have is around
our vulnerabilities to the wholesale financial market
overseas, given that we've got such a high level of
our Australian-owned banks require a huge amount of
capital from overseas. How
exposed is New Zealand banks to the
funding requirements, and the
shock to, or a sustained level of increase
in our funding requirements for our Australian-owned banks?
Yeah. So first I have to say that currently, despite
all the uncertainty that this recent conflict
has
meant,
wholesale markets and overall financial markets have been performing
remarkably well. We've seen very little stress in the system.
In terms of international linkages, there are some
international linkages. The New Zealand banks
have a lot of domestic funding through deposits, et cetera.
So the exposure to the wholesale financial market is
there, but it is a smaller proportion actually of their overall
funding.
But we do mention that in a stress scenario where you see
global rates increasing significantly, that could put some
stress on the system. But that's also why it's so
important that we have high liquidity and capital buffers in New
Zealand, and we do have that. So even if we saw that kind of pressure,
we do expect the banks to be resilient.
I don't know if you would like Chris to add-
Just a couple things. So it's around about a fifth of banks
overall funding that is through wholesale markets and offshore wholesale
markets. The big difference now compared to, say, the
GFC period is the amount of that funding that is now in
longer-term
terms, so that they don't have that rollover so regularly.
And so that just means that the need to go to market as
often is much less than it was back then.
So even if you do get disruptions, they have the flexibility to
wait for better periods in the market, so they don't have to get
either disruptions or pay a whole lot more.
So they're in a much better position to be able to manage that.
They have the flexibility for that.
They also have very strong liquidity positions as well.
So they're in a good, strong funding position.
Now as
Governor mentioned, part of that is the fact that they've got really good growth in
deposits over recent years. So that's a really strong part of their funding at the
moment.
Thanks.
Mr Chair, if I can just-
I'm going to go to Todd next.
Okay.
Sorry, Dan.
All right. Thanks, mate.
Got to keep moving.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm actually surprised Dan Bidwell didn't ask this question,
but
one of the things in the report I was most interested in was the
Financial Policy Committee
because obviously, as you know, this committee did the banking inquiry, and this
was one of the topics that came out of that.
So as I understand, this is the first report that that committee
would've signed off, but I'm just interested in hearing, yeah, how's that
committee going? Are you finding it useful?
What input is it having into reports like this, et cetera?
Because obviously we were very pleased to see the Reserve Bank take up that idea.
Yeah. Thank you so much for that question and highlighting that.
So this is indeed the first report
with the new Financial Policy Committee.
And there is a special box in the report on the
FPC and who is on the FPC. So it's a combination of
board members, I'm a member of course, and then we have two external
members, Heidi Richard and Prasanna Gai.
And
this was also my first financial stability report, although I've written
a number of them in my previous jobs.
But I think that it was really a
strength to have the Financial Policy Committee.
The report came up to them, and they had the opportunity to
comment and give input. And we had a good
discussion and I know that that added a number of things
from, again, a lot from the international perspective because you can see
in this report that we do see that there are some
heightened financial stability risks on the global arena, not just from the Iran
conflict, but it's also the way artificial intelligence is moving so quickly.
It's also
private credit and the increase in the non-bank financial
institutions on the global scale.
We're not very exposed to that in New Zealand, but we still mention it,
and some of those discussion became more
highlightedThanks to comments from the
Financial Policy Committee. So we are
really happy to have the FPC now, and their
contribution has been
strong to this report.
And I would just add, it's been quite strong.
We've currently had two meetings of the committee, so it's still very early days-
Mm-hmm
... canvassing a range of issues, including certain other
policy matters. I'm very encouraged by the
nature of the engagement that the committee has on these issues,
the quality of the members of the committee.
I think it will be a really important addition
to strengthening our approach to
determining financial policy.
That's really good to hear. And has having a couple of independent members been
really useful to have that kind of external perspective and challenge, in a
constructive way, some of the thinking?
We think so. So on page 15 in the report,
you do have a bit about the background and also more
information on Heidi Richards and Prasanna Gai.
So Heidi Richards has worked in both
Australia and the United States over many years, working on
supervision and financial
stability both at, well, APRA and the
Federal Reserve. So she has an excellent background within this field.
And Prasanna Gai is a professor at Auckland. He's also on the MPC.
So I
think it's a good addition to have external members on the
committee.
Mm. Thanks, Tom.
Dr Meagan Woods.
Thank you.
I've got terrible feedback. How's the-
Yes, still pretty bad. Shall I come back to you in a minute? Yeah. Do. Okay.
Barbara.
Good morning again. I just want to have just a discussion around
the insurance part and the stress testing that you're doing
as part of the Financial Stability Report.
Obviously,
raised it very early in this parliamentary term, and this committee,
around the importance of insurance for financial stability risk.
Obviously, it requires a joint effort between local
authorities, central government, and the insurers themselves,
particularly as more insurers look at risk-based pricing.
Was there any discussion around the other tool which insurers have
because we want a highly insured
New Zealand, given that when you look at our losses, it's second
to Bangladesh in the world. Was there any
discussion around another potential tool around parametric
pricing for insurers and whether the insurers are looking at
that as a potential because you don't want them to leave an area
unless they've
got a lot of potential claims risk in that one particular area.
But are insurers stepping through the different types of tools that they can
use to provide coverage?
I'll give you a little bit of background, and then I'll hand over to
Angus to comment a bit more. But there are two things in this report.
The first one is on insurance affordability,
where we do point out the risk of natural hazards in
New Zealand and how insurance premiums has been higher
after those events, tend to fall back after a while, but that we do
see risks of
even though insurance coverage now is high, there is a
risk that we would see more uninsurance or underinsurance going forward.
And of course, that could potentially be a financial stability risk.
We are also doing a reverse stress test on the insurance industry this year,
but that's more focused on the health and life insurers.
Sorry, I have to drink a little bit of water, so I'll take that opportunity to hand
over to Angus to give more details.
Yeah. And just in reference to that work in
relation to affordability,
we're working very closely with our co-regulators and financial regulatory
colleagues on that review. It's a really important review
in terms of really digging into
some of the issues and challenges around
availability and affordability, getting more data to
help better understand some of those availability and affordability
challenges, and then think about what some of those policy responses
might be in due course. So that review is very much underway.
Watch this space. I'm sure the committee will have opportunities to engage
on that further. Specifically in relation to your question around parametric
pricing, not specifically, but perhaps it might be
an area for us to dig into in future reports.
Yeah. Just a quick sup off that. Is there a reason why you don't want to stress
test fire in general? Is that because of the government's review into
insurance and that you're doing the reverse stress testing on just health
and PMO?
In short, the answer to that is our aim is
generally to
cycle through general insurance and then life and health
insurance year on year.
So we did a significant general insurance stress test last year, you might
remember, in relation to that really serious seismic risk
event.
This year we're doing life and health, and then we'll come back to general
insurance next year.
Thank you. Meagan, should we come back to you?
Let's try that. Let's try that.
Hmm. It's
long delay.
Yeah, I think it's having a few screens on.
Do you want to maybe put something into the chat, Meagan, and we can maybe do it
that way.
Chloe.
Yeah. So I just wanted to move to box B
on page 31 of the Financial Stability Report,
where you speak to how increasing climate change risks, rebuild
costs, and better modeling of seismic hazards resulting in rising premiums and
increasingly affecting the affordability of insurance, et cetera.
You also speak to how concerns over affordability, climate change, and dependence
on global reinsurance means the situation could change quickly
and warrants monitoring. I was wondering if you could explicitly spell out for us
what those key things are that you are monitoring, and what
it is that all responsible politicians should also be monitoring in that instance,
especially noting how quickly things can change.
Yeah. So,
this
box on page 31 is looking into the work that we're
doing together with the Council of Financial Regulators.
So that does include the FMA, Comcom, and MB.
And we're really pleased that this work is ongoing.
It will highlight the issues that
you mentioned in terms of the risk of
under-insurance and un-insurance going forward.
We have seen, and we have the graphs here on how insurance
premiums
increased after earthquakes and also extreme weather events.
And what we're looking for is collecting more
data, and that is an ongoing process,
to better highlight what the stressors are.
Last year in the FSR, we had a special box on the
reinsurance side,
showing that it has had an impact on premiums in New Zealand,
but also that the market has improved lately.
And then the whole job will give us an opportunity
both to get better information and come up with
suggestions in terms of policy. But with that said, I don't
know if either of you would like to comment a bit more on the details.
Yeah. I'll just add, I think the work that's underway at the moment
with this review is really exploring some of those areas
that do need to be monitored in more depth.
So what I would
say is, we're really looking forward to coming back and providing more detail on
that, not just us, the Reserve Bank, but more generally the-
That's it
... COFA
group,
and can provide a lot more detail as we're working that through at the moment in
terms of the type of issues, the type of data that we're really
trying to surface at the moment to build our collective
understanding at a system level about what some of these issues and
challenges are. And I should note that this is
very much being led by COFA, but working in collaboration with industry.
So again, I would just say, look, watch this space.
The work is very much underway, and we look forward to having further conversations
with committee in due course.
If I may, just finally on that point, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, so I completely appreciate that obviously there's limitations as to what
RBNZ can say, and obviously also what COFA's up to and as
far as this work goes, so just let me know if this is outside of the parameters.
But obviously, one of the many things that is also touched on is the kind of
approach to fiscal consolidation, and as you'll know, this government's approach is
very much on the spending side of things.
And I guess just trying to articulate and understand the
trade-offs therein, where, for sake of specific example, when we're talking about
climate adaptation, we have it from an OIA, the Greens do, from
MFN Treasury, that flood protection spending, for example, has been cut by
41% in this term of Parliament. That then potentially obviously
exposes us to less resilience and therefore greater impacts of climate change
weather events. But then the kind of trade-off, arguably from the political
side of things, is potentially more debt being taken on or the
requirement for more revenue per that fiscal consolidation point.
So I guess, how does the RBNZ kind of consider financial stability and
the trade-offs between the need for climate adaptation, which in
turn means that we have more resilient
financial stability,
and/or those points around kind of fiscal consolidation, and where do you see the
line of the points or the arguments that RBNZ
can actually make around the government's approach to fiscal policy?
I think our job,
in this report is really the financial stability and the system-wide
perspective, and stressing how important it is to
make sure that we have good data to be able to form the policies going
forward. So I think our role is really to
work with other government agencies.
The Treasury is also in the Council of Financial
Regulators, just to ensure that we have the right
information so that we then can hand it over to
parliamentarians to make the decisions that you have to make.
Thanks, Governor. I'm just going to read out Dr.
Megan Woods's, she's put in the chat just because of those sound
issues.
Mm-hmm.
"You note ongoing uncertainty about how long the Strait of Hormuz will remain
effectively closed, and that even after reopening it, it will take time for
supply conditions to normalize. How has the Bank incorporated prolonged
high fuel prices and potential physical fuel shortage into its
baseline and alternative scenarios for financial stability?
For example, I was talking to a protein food producer yesterday who was
expecting increased costs, fertilizer and feed in
2027 and flowing from there, and will this be a long
tail? Will this long tail be a part of the new
scenarios in a few months' time?"
Well, this is
the very difficult question that we're all struggling with right now, to
understand how long the conflict will last
and what the implications will be.
And even when we see an end to
the situation, how long will it take for things to normalize
again afterwards? So from a financial stability perspective,
the key things that matter will be
if this means that we see slower growth and it means
that some businesses become under pressure, and if they can
keep on payingOn their debt. Or if we,
in the worst-case scenarios, you'll see more
liquidations even for businesses.
Currently, we're not seeing that.
The data we have so far is actually showing that the defaults
have been coming down.
So we are watching this very closely.
We do know that the banks-
Sorry, Nancy, your microphone's on.
Yeah. No worries. So the one thing is that we do not
see this happening yet. We do see that the banks are in a strong
position to support
all types of businesses throughout this.
We also see in terms of if you look, for example, at the agricultural sector, that
commodity prices are still very high.
So we do expect that sector to, even though they are hurt by,
of course, higher diesel prices, higher transport costs,
they have been performing well over the past few years, and we
expect commodity prices to stay at a high level that will help that sector
going forward. But importantly, from financial stability
perspective, the banks do have the resilience to
support all types of businesses throughout this period.
Thank you. Is that thumbs up for you, Megan, or?
Mm.
That's okay. Thank you.
Barbara Edmonds.
Thank you.
Maybe perhaps a question for Jess.
Congratulations. I know it's been a long time coming in relation to the Deposit
Takers Scheme. Can you just take us through a summary?
Because I know you've
had drafting for the exposure drafts.
You've got to have consultation soon around the standards.
Just take us through how that implementation's going, sort of feedback that you're
getting from deposit takers, including non-bank deposit takers.
Because as you recall, as that was going through
the select committee last time, as we were putting the legislation through, there
was a lot of concern around proportionality.
So if you could just step us through that.
But we are up to the standards obviously being released in June for further
consultation.
Yeah. I'm really happy to hand that over to Jess. Jess Rowe, please.
Thank you very much. And yes, it has been
sort of it's a multi-year project.
We're really pleased with how it's rolling out.
Obviously, the legislation was passed in 2023.
The Depositor Compensation Scheme was stood up mid
last year, so that's implemented now.
And as you mentioned, we are in the process of consulting on
the suite of new prudential standards that for the
first time will bring together the banks and the non-bank deposit taker
sector. And it is underpinned by the
proportionality framework that you'll recall we briefed the
committee on and was actually inserted into the legislation by this
committee.
The feedback we've had is really good from particularly the
non-bank deposit taker sector. We've upped our
engagement with them because we haven't been the direct
supervisor of the sector before.
They've joined our Council of Financial Regulators
Deposit Takers forum, and we hold regular
workshops with them. And we find the
input that we get from them and the wider deposit-taking sector
essential for refining our policies.
So it's great that we've made it to the stage where
the legislation or the secondary legislation has been drafted and
released for consultation. So we're all on track,
looking forward to re-licensing and fully going live in
2028.
Thank you. Probably just a couple of final questions from me, if I may,
Governor, and probably a follow-on from Megan's question.
Obviously, it's a crystal ball in terms of duration with the
crisis. But in terms of your central scenario, what are your
nonlinear tipping points, e.g. oil price level,
shipping disruption, et cetera, that will drive the downside tail?
So for the Financial Stability Report, we don't do that kind
of general forecasting, so we will come back to that with our main
monetary policy statement.
But of course,
in terms of the risks and seeing more
severe effects on the New Zealand economy would be
if we see prices staying high for a
long period of time,
or in the worst scenarios, some sort of direct
supply disruptions
in terms of fuel. But we do not see that as...
With the information we've had recently, we consider
that it's likely for us to have
access to fuels, but we could see a high price.
But again, I really do not want to
get into forecasting ahead of our main monetary policy
meeting. But we are closely, of course, monitoring all
these effects and talking to our international peers as well to get
information on what they are seeing in this
space.
Sure. And finally, what do you think is the single biggest risk that markets
might be underpricing right now?
So I think that some of the things that we
highlight in terms of financial stability, where everyone is
focusing and monitoring the situation in the Middle East very
closely. I think that the other risk that we also
highlight in terms of artificial intelligence and the
risk of cyberattacks on the financial sector,
or
the increase in the non, what we call the non-bank financial
intermediaries. Those are things like hedge funds, private
credit, et cetera. If we see any disturbances there, we know that New
Zealand is not directly exposed.
But internationally, this has grown a lot and that could
cause turbulence in financial markets that would then spill into
uncertainty for us as well. So I do think it's important to
also monitor and follow those risks right now.
Yes. Thank you, Governor, and thank you Angus, Chris, and Jess for joining us
today. We look forward to seeing you in a few weeks' time.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Members, just a few items that we're just tabling that we can bring up
when we meet each other next week. So on that note, have a fantastic
rest of your day.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Chair.
Thanks, everyone.